docs/source/installation.rst, before:

.. 
   ContextGem
   
   Copyright 2025 Shcherbak AI AS. All rights reserved. Developed by Sergii Shcherbak.
   
   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at
   
       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   
   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.

:og:description: ContextGem: Installation

Installation
============

🔧 Prerequisites
-----------------

Before installing ContextGem, ensure you have:

* Python 3.10-3.13
* pip (Python package installer)

📦 Installation Methods
------------------------

From PyPI
~~~~~~~~~

The simplest way to install ContextGem is via pip:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install -U contextgem

From Source
~~~~~~~~~~~

To install from source:

.. code-block:: bash

    git clone https://github.com/shcherbak-ai/contextgem.git
    cd contextgem
    pip install -e .

Development Installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For development, we use Poetry:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Install poetry if you don't have it
    pip install poetry
    
    # Install dependencies including development extras
    poetry install --with dev
    
    # Activate the virtual environment
    poetry shell

✅ Verifying Installation
--------------------------

To verify that ContextGem is installed correctly, run:

.. code-block:: bash

    python -c "import contextgem; print(contextgem.__version__)"

Commit message:

build: v0.12.0
Fixed a bug when, for a BooleanConcept with expected valid False values, no items were extracted due to imprecise instructions in the internal prompt (the concept was considered "not addressed", which resulted in an LLM outputting an empty list of extracted items). Added new tests for extracting truthy/falsy/non-determined boolean values. Migrated to uv (replaces poetry) and Ruff (replaces Black and isort, with additional linting), pyright and deptry; updated pre-commit config accordingly. Fixed some typing issues, cleaned up and refactored code. Documentation updates: added more details to parameter tables for Aspects API, Concepts API, and LLM config docs; improved CONTRIBUTING.md; introduced minor updates to README.md.

docs/source/installation.rst, after:

.. 
   ContextGem
   
   Copyright 2025 Shcherbak AI AS. All rights reserved. Developed by Sergii Shcherbak.
   
   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at
   
       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   
   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.

:og:description: ContextGem: Installation

Installation
============

🔧 Prerequisites
-----------------

Before installing ContextGem, ensure you have:

* Python 3.10-3.13
* pip (Python package installer)

📦 Installation Methods
------------------------

From PyPI
~~~~~~~~~~

The simplest way to install ContextGem is via pip:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install -U contextgem

Or using uv (faster alternative):

.. code-block:: bash

    uv add contextgem

Development Installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For development, clone the repository and use uv:

.. code-block:: bash

    git clone https://github.com/shcherbak-ai/contextgem.git
    cd contextgem
    
    # Install uv if you don't have it
    pip install uv
    
    # Install dependencies including development extras
    uv sync --all-groups

✅ Verifying Installation
--------------------------

To verify that ContextGem is installed correctly, run:

.. code-block:: bash

    python -c "import contextgem; print(contextgem.__version__)"
