docs/source/concepts/rating_concept.rst, before:

.. 
   ContextGem
   
   Copyright 2025 Shcherbak AI AS. All rights reserved. Developed by Sergii Shcherbak.
   
   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at
   
       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   
   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.

:og:image: https://contextgem.dev/_static/docs_preview_image_rating_concept.png

RatingConcept
==============

:class:`~contextgem.public.concepts.RatingConcept` is a specialized concept type that calculates, infers, and derives rating values from documents within a clearly defined numerical scale.


📝 Overview
-------------

:class:`~contextgem.public.concepts.RatingConcept` enables sophisticated rating analysis from documents, allowing you to:

* **Derive implicit ratings**: Calculate ratings based on sentiment analysis, key criteria, or contextual evaluation
* **Generate evaluative scores**: Produce numerical assessments that quantify quality, relevance, or performance
* **Normalize diverse signals**: Convert qualitative assessments into consistent numerical ratings within your defined scale
* **Synthesize overall scores**: Combine multiple factors or opinions into comprehensive rating assessments

This concept type is particularly valuable for generating evaluative information from documents such as:

* Product and service reviews where sentiment must be quantified on a standardized scale
* Performance assessments requiring numerical quality or satisfaction scoring
* Risk evaluations needing severity or probability measurements
* Content analyses where subjective characteristics must be rated objectively


💻 Usage Example
------------------

Here's a simple example of how to use ``RatingConcept`` to extract a product rating:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../dev/usage_examples/docs/concepts/rating_concept/rating_concept.py
   :language: python

.. raw:: html

   <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/shcherbak-ai/contextgem/blob/main/dev/notebooks/docs/concepts/rating_concept/rating_concept.ipynb">
     <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
   </a>


⚙️ Parameters
--------------

When creating a ``RatingConcept``, you can specify the following parameters:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 20 60
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Parameter
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``name``
     - str
     - A unique name identifier for the concept
   * - ``description``
     - str
     - A clear description of what should be evaluated and rated, including the criteria for assigning different values within the rating scale (e.g., "Evaluate product quality based on features, durability, and performance where 1 represents poor quality and 10 represents exceptional quality"). The more specific the description, the more consistent and accurate the ratings will be.
   * - ``rating_scale``
     - :class:`~contextgem.public.data_models.RatingScale`
     - Defines the boundaries for valid ratings (e.g., ``RatingScale(start=1, end=5)`` for a 1-5 star rating, or ``RatingScale(start=0, end=100)`` for a percentage-based evaluation). This parameter establishes the numerical range within which all ratings must fall, ensuring consistency across evaluations.
   * - ``llm_role``
     - str
     - The role of the LLM responsible for extracting the concept. Available values: ``"extractor_text"``, ``"reasoner_text"``, ``"extractor_vision"``, ``"reasoner_vision"``. Defaults to ``"extractor_text"``. For more details, see :ref:`llm-roles-label`.
   * - ``add_justifications``
     - bool
     - Whether to include justifications for extracted items (defaults to ``False``). Justifications provide explanations of why the LLM assigned specific rating values and the reasoning behind the evaluation, which is especially useful for understanding the factors that influenced the rating. For example, a justification might explain that a smartphone received an 8/10 quality rating based on its premium build materials, advanced camera system, and long battery life, despite lacking expandable storage.
   * - ``justification_depth``
     - str
     - Justification detail level. Available values: ``"brief"``, ``"balanced"``, ``"comprehensive"``. Defaults to ``"brief"``
   * - ``justification_max_sents``
     - int
     - Maximum sentences in a justification (defaults to ``2``)
   * - ``add_references``
     - bool
     - Whether to include source references for extracted items (defaults to ``False``). References indicate the specific locations in the document that provided information or evidence used to determine the rating. This is particularly useful for understanding which parts of the document influenced the rating assessment, allowing to trace back evaluations to relevant content that supports the numerical value assigned.
   * - ``reference_depth``
     - str
     - Source reference granularity. Available values: ``"paragraphs"``, ``"sentences"``. Defaults to ``"paragraphs"``
   * - ``singular_occurrence``
     - bool
     - Whether this concept is restricted to having only one extracted item. If ``True``, only a single rating will be extracted. Defaults to ``False`` (multiple ratings are allowed). For rating concepts, this parameter is particularly useful when you want to extract a single overall score (e.g., *"overall product quality"*) rather than identifying multiple ratings throughout the document for different aspects or features. This helps distinguish between a global evaluation versus component-specific ratings. Note that with advanced LLMs, this constraint may not be required as they can often infer the appropriate number of ratings to extract from the concept's name, description, and rating context.
   * - ``custom_data``
     - dict
     - Optional. Dictionary for storing any additional data that you want to associate with the concept. This data must be JSON-serializable. This data is not used for extraction but can be useful for custom processing or downstream tasks. Defaults to an empty dictionary.


🚀 Advanced Usage
--------------------

🔍 References and Justifications for Extraction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When extracting a :class:`~contextgem.public.concepts.RatingConcept`, it's often useful to include justifications to understand the reasoning behind the score:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../dev/usage_examples/docs/concepts/rating_concept/refs_and_justifications.py
   :language: python

.. raw:: html

   <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/shcherbak-ai/contextgem/blob/main/dev/notebooks/docs/concepts/rating_concept/refs_and_justifications.ipynb">
     <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
   </a>

⭐⭐ Multiple Rating Categories
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can extract multiple rating categories from a document by creating separate rating concepts:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../dev/usage_examples/docs/concepts/rating_concept/multiple_ratings.py
   :language: python

.. raw:: html

   <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/shcherbak-ai/contextgem/blob/main/dev/notebooks/docs/concepts/rating_concept/multiple_ratings.ipynb">
     <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
   </a>


📊 Extracted Items
--------------------

When a :class:`~contextgem.public.concepts.RatingConcept` is extracted, it is populated with **a list of extracted items** accessible through the ``.extracted_items`` property. Each item is an instance of the ``_IntegerItem`` class with the following attributes:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 20 60
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Attribute
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``value``
     - int
     - The extracted rating value as an integer within the defined rating scale
   * - ``justification``
     - str
     - Explanation of why this rating was extracted (only if ``add_justifications=True``)
   * - ``reference_paragraphs``
     - list[:class:`~contextgem.public.paragraphs.Paragraph`]
     - List of paragraph objects that influenced the rating determination (only if ``add_references=True``)
   * - ``reference_sentences``
     - list[:class:`~contextgem.public.sentences.Sentence`]
     - List of sentence objects that influenced the rating determination (only if ``add_references=True`` and ``reference_depth="sentences"``)


💡 Best Practices
-------------------

- Create descriptive names for your rating concepts that clearly indicate what aspect is being evaluated (e.g., *"Product Usability Rating"* rather than just *"Rating"*).
- Enhance extraction quality by including clear definitions of what each point on the scale represents in your concept description (e.g., *"1 = poor, 3 = average, 5 = excellent"*).
- Provide specific evaluation criteria in your concept description to guide the LLM's assessment process. For example, when rating software usability, specify that factors like interface intuitiveness, learning curve, and navigation efficiency should be considered.
- Enable justifications (using ``add_justifications=True``) when you need to understand the reasoning behind a rating, which is particularly valuable for evaluations that involve complex criteria where the rationale may not be immediately obvious from the score alone.
- Enable references (using ``add_references=True``) to trace ratings back to specific evidence in the document that informed the evaluation.
- Apply ``singular_occurrence=True`` for concepts that should yield a single comprehensive rating (like an overall product score) rather than multiple ratings throughout the document.

Commit message:

feat: add tuple support for RatingConcept rating scale
Added support for (start, end) tuple in RatingConcept.rating_scale. Deprecated RatingScale class with warning (removal planned for v1.0.0).

docs/source/concepts/rating_concept.rst, after:

.. 
   ContextGem
   
   Copyright 2025 Shcherbak AI AS. All rights reserved. Developed by Sergii Shcherbak.
   
   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at
   
       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   
   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.

:og:image: https://contextgem.dev/_static/docs_preview_image_rating_concept.png

RatingConcept
==============

:class:`~contextgem.public.concepts.RatingConcept` is a specialized concept type that calculates, infers, and derives rating values from documents within a clearly defined numerical scale.


📝 Overview
-------------

:class:`~contextgem.public.concepts.RatingConcept` enables sophisticated rating analysis from documents, allowing you to:

* **Derive implicit ratings**: Calculate ratings based on sentiment analysis, key criteria, or contextual evaluation
* **Generate evaluative scores**: Produce numerical assessments that quantify quality, relevance, or performance
* **Normalize diverse signals**: Convert qualitative assessments into consistent numerical ratings within your defined scale
* **Synthesize overall scores**: Combine multiple factors or opinions into comprehensive rating assessments

This concept type is particularly valuable for generating evaluative information from documents such as:

* Product and service reviews where sentiment must be quantified on a standardized scale
* Performance assessments requiring numerical quality or satisfaction scoring
* Risk evaluations needing severity or probability measurements
* Content analyses where subjective characteristics must be rated objectively


💻 Usage Example
------------------

Here's a simple example of how to use ``RatingConcept`` to extract a product rating:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../dev/usage_examples/docs/concepts/rating_concept/rating_concept.py
   :language: python

.. raw:: html

   <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/shcherbak-ai/contextgem/blob/main/dev/notebooks/docs/concepts/rating_concept/rating_concept.ipynb">
     <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
   </a>


⚙️ Parameters
--------------

When creating a ``RatingConcept``, you can specify the following parameters:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 20 60
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Parameter
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``name``
     - str
     - A unique name identifier for the concept
   * - ``description``
     - str
     - A clear description of what should be evaluated and rated, including the criteria for assigning different values within the rating scale (e.g., "Evaluate product quality based on features, durability, and performance where 1 represents poor quality and 10 represents exceptional quality"). The more specific the description, the more consistent and accurate the ratings will be.
   * - ``rating_scale``
     - tuple[int, int]
     - Defines the boundaries for valid ratings as a tuple of (start, end) values (e.g., ``(1, 5)`` for a 1-5 star rating, or ``(0, 100)`` for a percentage-based evaluation). This parameter establishes the numerical range within which all ratings must fall, ensuring consistency across evaluations.
   * - ``llm_role``
     - str
     - The role of the LLM responsible for extracting the concept. Available values: ``"extractor_text"``, ``"reasoner_text"``, ``"extractor_vision"``, ``"reasoner_vision"``. Defaults to ``"extractor_text"``. For more details, see :ref:`llm-roles-label`.
   * - ``add_justifications``
     - bool
     - Whether to include justifications for extracted items (defaults to ``False``). Justifications provide explanations of why the LLM assigned specific rating values and the reasoning behind the evaluation, which is especially useful for understanding the factors that influenced the rating. For example, a justification might explain that a smartphone received an 8/10 quality rating based on its premium build materials, advanced camera system, and long battery life, despite lacking expandable storage.
   * - ``justification_depth``
     - str
     - Justification detail level. Available values: ``"brief"``, ``"balanced"``, ``"comprehensive"``. Defaults to ``"brief"``
   * - ``justification_max_sents``
     - int
     - Maximum sentences in a justification (defaults to ``2``)
   * - ``add_references``
     - bool
     - Whether to include source references for extracted items (defaults to ``False``). References indicate the specific locations in the document that provided information or evidence used to determine the rating. This is particularly useful for understanding which parts of the document influenced the rating assessment, allowing to trace back evaluations to relevant content that supports the numerical value assigned.
   * - ``reference_depth``
     - str
     - Source reference granularity. Available values: ``"paragraphs"``, ``"sentences"``. Defaults to ``"paragraphs"``
   * - ``singular_occurrence``
     - bool
     - Whether this concept is restricted to having only one extracted item. If ``True``, only a single rating will be extracted. Defaults to ``False`` (multiple ratings are allowed). For rating concepts, this parameter is particularly useful when you want to extract a single overall score (e.g., *"overall product quality"*) rather than identifying multiple ratings throughout the document for different aspects or features. This helps distinguish between a global evaluation versus component-specific ratings. Note that with advanced LLMs, this constraint may not be required as they can often infer the appropriate number of ratings to extract from the concept's name, description, and rating context.
   * - ``custom_data``
     - dict
     - Optional. Dictionary for storing any additional data that you want to associate with the concept. This data must be JSON-serializable. This data is not used for extraction but can be useful for custom processing or downstream tasks. Defaults to an empty dictionary.


🚀 Advanced Usage
--------------------

🔍 References and Justifications for Extraction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When extracting a :class:`~contextgem.public.concepts.RatingConcept`, it's often useful to include justifications to understand the reasoning behind the score:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../dev/usage_examples/docs/concepts/rating_concept/refs_and_justifications.py
   :language: python

.. raw:: html

   <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/shcherbak-ai/contextgem/blob/main/dev/notebooks/docs/concepts/rating_concept/refs_and_justifications.ipynb">
     <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
   </a>

⭐⭐ Multiple Rating Categories
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can extract multiple rating categories from a document by creating separate rating concepts:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../dev/usage_examples/docs/concepts/rating_concept/multiple_ratings.py
   :language: python

.. raw:: html

   <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/shcherbak-ai/contextgem/blob/main/dev/notebooks/docs/concepts/rating_concept/multiple_ratings.ipynb">
     <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
   </a>


📊 Extracted Items
--------------------

When a :class:`~contextgem.public.concepts.RatingConcept` is extracted, it is populated with **a list of extracted items** accessible through the ``.extracted_items`` property. Each item is an instance of the ``_IntegerItem`` class with the following attributes:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 20 60
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Attribute
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``value``
     - int
     - The extracted rating value as an integer within the defined rating scale
   * - ``justification``
     - str
     - Explanation of why this rating was extracted (only if ``add_justifications=True``)
   * - ``reference_paragraphs``
     - list[:class:`~contextgem.public.paragraphs.Paragraph`]
     - List of paragraph objects that influenced the rating determination (only if ``add_references=True``)
   * - ``reference_sentences``
     - list[:class:`~contextgem.public.sentences.Sentence`]
     - List of sentence objects that influenced the rating determination (only if ``add_references=True`` and ``reference_depth="sentences"``)


💡 Best Practices
-------------------

- Create descriptive names for your rating concepts that clearly indicate what aspect is being evaluated (e.g., *"Product Usability Rating"* rather than just *"Rating"*).
- Enhance extraction quality by including clear definitions of what each point on the scale represents in your concept description (e.g., *"1 = poor, 3 = average, 5 = excellent"*).
- Provide specific evaluation criteria in your concept description to guide the LLM's assessment process. For example, when rating software usability, specify that factors like interface intuitiveness, learning curve, and navigation efficiency should be considered.
- Enable justifications (using ``add_justifications=True``) when you need to understand the reasoning behind a rating, which is particularly valuable for evaluations that involve complex criteria where the rationale may not be immediately obvious from the score alone.
- Enable references (using ``add_references=True``) to trace ratings back to specific evidence in the document that informed the evaluation.
- Apply ``singular_occurrence=True`` for concepts that should yield a single comprehensive rating (like an overall product score) rather than multiple ratings throughout the document.
